Welcome to JW Broadcasting.
Since all of us experience trials,
you'll appreciate this month's program,
which focuses on the topic of comfort.
We'll learn how comfort can bring joy to the giver and the receiver.
Caregivers provide constant comfort,
but who comforts them?
Damian and Carolina share how the Bible and loving friends
help them continue caring for their loved ones.
As we dig for treasures in the book of Joel,
we'll examine the power of endurance during times of trial.
And our music video highlights the importance of expressing gratitude
to those we care about.
This is JW Broadcasting.
Our theme Scripture is 2 Corinthians chapter 1, verses 3 and 4.
Praise be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Father of tender mercies, and the God of all comfort,
who comforts us in all our trials so that we may be able to comfort others
in any sort of trial with the comfort that we receive from God.
From the time we were born, all of us have been in need of comfort.
You don't remember the first time you cried because you were hungry,
uncomfortable or needing to be held,
but you probably do remember the last time you needed comfort,
and no doubt many of us are in need of comfort right now.
This is understandable.
Psalm 90 verse 10 poetically describes our life as imperfect humans
by stating the span of our life is 70 years or 80 if one is especially strong,
but they are filled with trouble and sorrow.
They quickly pass by and away we fly.
Many different situations can cause us trouble and sorrow,
disappointment or pain.
Some of them are what we might call common because every imperfect human has to deal with them,
getting sick, growing old and grieving the death of a loved one.
Other reasons for distress could be called circumstantial, accidents, economic problems,
the breakup of a marriage, natural disasters,
becoming a victim of abuse or other crimes, civil unrest and war.
In addition, we may need comfort related to our worship,
living in a divided household, experiencing persecution or imprisonment,
facing ridicule in school or at the workplace,
or perhaps a family member or a close friend leaves Jehovah.
Repentant wrongdoers also need comfort when they return to the congregation.
Whether the cause of our distress is common, circumstantial or because of our worship,
all of us are in need of comfort and the problem is worldwide.
Verse Peter 5.9 tells us that the same kind of sufferings are being experienced
by the entire association of your brothers in the world.
However, we can find comfort from the one who is revealed in verses 6 and 7,
where it directs, humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God
so that he may exalt you in due time while you throw all your anxiety on him
because he cares for you.
Jehovah has always been the ultimate source of true comfort.
Moses was convinced that Jehovah would support and comfort him no matter what situation he faced.
With confidence, he wrote what we find at Deuteronomy 3327.
God is a refuge from ancient times. His everlasting arms are beneath you.
When we're down and struggling to get up, Jehovah will put his arms beneath us.
Gently lift us up and help us to get back on our feet.
The Psalms repeatedly express appreciation for Jehovah's tender care and comfort.
For example, the writer of Psalm 9419 voiced his gratitude to Jehovah by saying,
When anxieties overwhelmed me, you comforted and soothed me as Romans 154 confirms.
All the things that were written beforehand were written for our instruction,
so that through our endurance and through the comfort from the scriptures, we might have hope.
No matter what's causing us distress, we can find scriptures that bring us comfort.
The book Scriptures for Christian Living includes the heading comfort,
which discusses many causes of discouragement.
Not only does it direct us to scriptures that confirm Jehovah's loving care,
but it also gives examples of Bible characters who suffered these hardships
and how Jehovah helped them.
One of the best ways to receive comfort from Jehovah is to ask him for it.
In other words of Psalm 145, King David praised Jehovah for the way he answers prayers.
Let's read verses 18 and 19.
David wrote, Jehovah is near to all those calling on him.
To all who call on him in truth, he satisfies the desire of those who fear him.
He hears their cry for help, and he rescues them.
Just as a loving parent patiently responds to his child's cheerful cries,
Jehovah turns his compassionate ear to our pleas for help.
As described in 1 Samuel 1 and 2, the Israelite woman Hannah was so distraught
and extremely bitter over not having any children that she couldn't eat.
When she approached Jehovah at the tabernacle, she began to pray and to weep uncontrollably.
Jehovah listened to and acted on this humble woman's prayer.
After that, Hannah went on her way and ate, and her face was no longer downcast.
Similarly, Jehovah will comfort us when we pour out our concerns in heartfelt prayer.
In view of all that the Bible has to say about comfort, we're not surprised when we read the words of 2 Corinthians 1, 3 and 4.
Please open to this theme text for our discussion.
As we read it again, reflect on how these words can help us to comfort others
while we ourselves cope with the stressful conditions of these critical times.
2 Corinthians 1, 3 and 4 reads,
Praise to be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Father of tender mercies, and the God of all comfort,
who comforts us in all our trials so that we may be able to comfort others in any sort of trial
with the comfort that we receive from God.
The expression tender mercies comes from a word that's used to convey sorrow at the suffering of another.
It describes Jehovah's tender feelings for his faithful servants who are in distress.
Paul goes on to say that Jehovah is the God of all comfort,
so all comfort originates with Jehovah.
Verse 4 identifies a special way that Jehovah gives comfort,
and that's through our brothers and sisters.
Let's read it again. It says that Jehovah comforts us in all our trials
so that we may be able to comfort others in any sort of trial with the comfort that we receive from Him.
Did you notice the connection between our receiving comfort and becoming equipped to comfort others?
Jehovah comforts us, and as humans created in God's image,
we are moved by His Holy Spirit to share that comfort with others.
Therefore, Christians are not divided into two groups,
those who give comfort and those who receive it.
No, we all are obligated to give comfort even though we ourselves are in need of comfort.
How can we do this?
Consider the Apostle Paul.
During his first imprisonment in Rome,
Paul expressed appreciation for many brothers who became a source of great comfort to Him.
In Colossians 4, he mentioned some of them by name.
Aristarchus, Ticacus, and Mark.
We'll hear more about these three men in a later part of the broadcast.
Paul was grateful for the efforts his brothers made to visit Him
and to comfort Him by their words and practical assistance.
But for Paul, it wasn't all about receiving.
He used his time while in prison to build up those who came to see Him
and to write letters of encouragement to the congregations.
A sister in South Africa, by the name of Claudine,
imitated Paul's example after she underwent major surgery.
Because of the COVID-19 pandemic, she couldn't receive visitors.
But Claudine was determined not to feel sorry for herself
and she asked God to give her the strength to comfort others.
Claudine contacted a woman who had studied the Bible in the past.
The woman resumed her study and attended meetings by video conference.
Next, Claudine started a study with the woman's younger sister,
who gave her the names of four other women who wanted to study.
By her determination to comfort others while coping with her own illness,
Claudine started studies with a total of sixteen women.
At times, those who are distressed and in need of comfort
may be reluctant to accept help.
For example, after Moses related God's promise to deliver his people
from Egyptian bondage, the Israelites at first did not listen to Moses
because of their discouragement.
Later, they did pay attention.
Naomi, whose name means my pleasantness,
was living in a foreign land because of a famine in Israel.
She was widowed and was grieving the death of her two sons.
When she was able to return to Israel, the woman of Bethlehem greeted her saying,
is this Naomi?
Feeling that Jehovah was responsible for her bitterness,
she replied with the sorrowful words,
to not call me Naomi, call me Mera,
for the Almighty has made life very bitter for me.
However, Naomi soon drew closer to God's people
and accepted loving help.
Her bitterness was replaced with joy.
If you're suffering, try to resist the natural inclination to withdraw
and to avoid contact with others.
This will be a challenge,
but experience has shown that making the effort to be with others
opens the door to receiving the comfort Jehovah provides
through the compassionate words and actions of our brothers and sisters.
The comfort Jehovah provides when we endure tribulation
can train us to be more sensitive to the needs of others,
and that's the first step to giving comfort,
being attentive and observant to identify those in need of comfort.
In many cases, the need is obvious.
Our brother met with an accident or has lost his job
or a close friend or a family member has died.
For some, the need may not be so obvious.
We may notice a change in behavior
or their facial expression may tell us that something is troubling them.
We don't want to pry,
but we can kindly approach them and gently draw them out.
They may need time before they feel comfortable opening up
about their feelings, so we want to be patient.
The second step to giving comfort is pray to determine what we can do.
There may be little or nothing we can do to eliminate the cause of their distress.
For example, a long-time missionary who lost his wife said,
I don't want to get over it.
I just want to learn to cope.
The important thing for us to do is to apply the words of Proverbs 327.
Do not withhold good from those to whom you should give it
if it is within your power to help.
We may feel awkward, not knowing what to say or do.
If so, reflect on the meaning of the Greek word
often rendered comfort in the Bible.
It literally means a calling to one side.
In other words, take the third step.
Make yourself available.
Don't feel that you have to give a speech.
Our brother or sister needs to know that someone cares
and our very presence can be comforting.
It could be that he just wants someone to talk to.
If so, be a good listener.
If you read scriptures together, emphasize that the words reflect
how Jehovah feels about his suffering.
It's not so much what you say or do.
What counts is that you acknowledge his suffering
and show heartfelt compassion.
For example, a sister serving at World Headquarters
lost her mother and father during the pandemic.
After spending a long day of hospice with her mother,
she returned home to discover a huge fruit basket
delivered by her fellow workers at Bethel.
She commented,
it wasn't the fruit itself which I had eaten many times before,
or the way it was so beautifully decorated.
But it was the thoughtfulness and love behind the gesture
that made my heart swell at one of the most difficult times
in my life.
When a devastating earthquake in tsunami struck Eastern Japan
in March 2011, brothers in Japan and other countries
responded immediately.
Two and a half years later, my wife and I
made a personal visit to several congregations in that area.
Brothers in Nepal had sent messages of comfort to one congregation.
Brothers in another congregation showed us a board
with many similar notes written in languages of the Philippines.
Brothers commented,
we can't read the notes,
but we know what they say.
What great comfort those short messages
brought to our Japanese brothers.
While we were there,
Super Typhoon Haiyan was ravaging the Philippine Islands,
referring to the typhoon the Japanese brothers said,
now it's our turn to comfort our brothers in the Philippines.
As this world sinks ever deeper into these critical last days,
our need for comfort will only increase.
How grateful we are that Jehovah is the father of tender mercies
and the God of all comfort.
He has generously given us the gift of prayer,
abundant words of comfort in the Bible,
and a compassionate worldwide brotherhood.
As we benefit from these loving provisions,
may we be alert to recognize others who need comfort,
determine what practical help we can offer,
and take steps to comfort others
while we cope during these critical times.
Can you think of someone who might need comfort?
Focusing on the blessings that come from helping someone
can move us to action.
When we comfort others,
it can have positive and far-reaching effects.
Let's see how in lessons from the Watchtower.
When I look at this picture of Aristarchus holding on to Paul,
sticking closer into a challenging time,
it makes me think about how brothers and sisters really help me out
through a difficult situation.
The whole area was flooded,
including the house in which I was living at that time.
I was waiting through waters which, at the deepest point,
came up to about chest height.
The battery on my phone was completely flat,
which meant I couldn't contact anybody.
The Watchtower highlighted Ticacus as a trustworthy friend,
and my friends have been very trustworthy,
and without them,
I wouldn't have been able to cope.
My dad suddenly had a massive stroke,
but then my brother,
he left Rover,
and then just a few months later, my dad died.
When I was studying this article,
I could have immediately put names down
for people who helped me like Aristarchus and Ticacus.
But then, as he came down to Mark,
and the practical help that he was able to give,
well, I thought, that's my whole congregation.
In 2016, my wife, Kerry,
she lost her battle with cancer,
and yeah, all of a sudden I was on mute.
Kerry is the best person I ever met.
I learned from her that when you let people in,
you let your home run to.
I was waiting through the water,
and I was just thinking if I can just make it
to the whole of this brother and sister,
it'll be all right.
I'm sure enough, when I arrived at their home,
I was welcome inside,
opportunity to get clean,
get warm,
and enjoy an ice meal.
And just like Aristarchus was willing to make sacrifices,
they offered me to stay in their home for,
as long as I needed to.
It was clearly inconvenient for me to stay in their home,
but that inconvenience that it was outweighed
by their genuine desire to help
and look after me through a difficult time.
As soon as I plugged in my phone,
and it got power,
the phone rang,
and it was the brother that had been my Bible instructor
as a youth,
and it was just checking and making sure
that I was all right
and that I got everything that I needed.
But did it stop there?
In the time that followed,
my friends continued to reach out to get in touch
to make sure that I got everything that I needed,
they even continued to evacuate me around for me.
It was just to make sure that I could move on
from what I'd take in place.
A good place for anyone.
She invited me for hot chocolate,
and then she just asking how I was getting out,
I said I was really struggling to sleep,
and she very kindly showed me her journal.
I thought it was such a great idea,
and I found it really helped.
I would always have five things
that I could say thank you to Jehovah for.
My husband League is an amazing listener,
just listening to whatever I was feeling at that time,
even if it was a bit wild.
Do other brothers and sisters
that also were very patient with me,
and I would repeat myself over and over again.
They didn't mind, they were just happy to listen.
I needed reassurance,
because I didn't feel I was coping with my father.
It was like I couldn't believe he passed away
until I'd seen the death certificate,
and it was the same with my brother.
It wouldn't be real until I heard the announcement,
and I thought that's kind of sound very strange,
but I shared that with my friend,
you know, that's fine, it's okay.
And that was really reassuring.
I didn't think I was going crazy.
When you're faced with something like that,
normal things become like epic endeavors.
Things that you might have looked forward to,
suddenly take on a level of anxiety.
Some friends of mine, they were like,
okay, get into the meetings,
that's not even a thing now.
You can just come with us.
Then I'm going to the meeting with two people,
rather than going on my own.
That was super helpful.
Two sisters took it upon themselves,
to I am my shit.
I could, I could I had shit,
but that was such a help, you know?
I'd like to tell my friends just how much
all their support has meant.
Not only does it help you get through a difficult period,
but that love, that care,
that loyalty of sticking with you,
it helps you keep stabilising your whole of service.
Naturally, you can think well,
I don't really know what to say.
I don't think I can do anything to change this,
but it's not true.
Just the smallest little thing
made such a big difference.
And the things that I'll never forget.
The brothers and sisters out of their thoughtfulness
and out of their own creativity,
they are able to provide,
just what you need, just when you need it.
It was the most difficult thing
that I have ever had to deal with.
But it was also the most faith-strickening thing
I've ever been through as well.
Aristarchus, Ticacus,
and Mark are just a few examples in the Bible
of those who provided comfort.
For a personal study project,
why not learn about others who did the same,
such as Barnabas or Onosiferus,
and how you can imitate them?
Every day, patient visitation groups
around the world,
provide comfort to brothers and sisters in the hospital.
Let's see how they strengthen those facing serious health issues.
I would ask Jehovah,
how am I going to be able to encourage my uncle
when I myself need encouragement?
The doctor said,
this is your lung.
See this mass here?
You have lung cancer.
There's a feeling of helplessness
when someone you rely on falls ill.
And they're so little you can do to help her comfort them.
PVG stands for Patient Visitation Group.
It's a group made up of elders,
organized to visit our hospitalized brothers and sisters.
It's a form of shepherding.
We offer practical help,
but the focus is on providing spiritual support.
Assuring those friends that Jehovah sees them,
and that they had the support of both the congregation
and Jehovah's Holy Spirit.
The first time I was hospitalized,
I don't think I'd even been in there for 24 hours
before they started visiting me,
even though they didn't know me.
They didn't know who this route was.
When elders from the publisher's own congregation
participate in these PVG visits,
it's invaluable.
Seeing someone they know can provide a lot of comfort
for that brother and sister who needs it.
The first step is to listen and let that brother and sister
express themselves freely.
When we address their spiritual need,
always using the Bible to offer encouragement.
My uncle was in need of encouragement.
And frankly, I was too.
Just then, two men with big smiles on their faces
headed our way, and I thought,
those are doctors.
There are brothers.
And they introduced themselves as members of the PVG.
And we were so moved by that
because it was exactly what we needed.
My mom's condition had worsened,
and I had to head to the hospital.
We arrived very late around 2 a.m.,
but still, a brother from PVG was there waiting for us.
All our needs were lovingly cared for.
We were even provided with a place to stay.
After that visit ended,
I remember seeing those brothers outside the hospital on their way out.
Even from where I was, serving from afar,
I could tell that those brothers got so much joy from their assignment.
And not only them, their wives too.
Because they could have spent their day differently
on a walk or relaxing.
But no, they chose to be here.
They asked me to read Isaiah 41-10.
But I couldn't get through it.
I just cried.
So they read it to me.
And it hits differently
when you hear it as Jehovah speaking to you personally.
Daughter, do not be afraid.
Do not be anxious.
Because I'm here with you.
It was as if Jehovah were saying,
I am here, my daughter.
I'm right here for you.
And I sent these brothers so that they can strengthen and encourage you.
So don't give up.
I never imagined at the moment that I felt the most alone and sad.
Jehovah would provide that visit for me and my uncle.
May Jehovah continue to bless them and their beautiful work.
What those brothers did for me made all the difference.
I felt Jehovah's loving care through these brothers.
That brotherly love was made so real to me.
They motivated me to give back.
It allows us to convey a small portion of the immense love Jehovah has for us.
And they're always so grateful for the visit.
Recognizing it as one way Jehovah and his organization care for them.
You can see it on their face and from their expressions
that they consider this tender care is coming from Jehovah.
It's so rewarding to be used by Jehovah in this way.
The patient visitation group has experienced the truthfulness of Jesus' words.
There's more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.
However, sometimes even the most giving people need to receive.
Let's see why caregivers need care themselves.
Okay, let's practice bells.
Do you remember the bells?
Should I write them down?
Yeah.
My mother was diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease.
I provide for her economically and I'm her caregiver.
This involves preparing her meals, making sure she takes her medication
and making conversation so she keeps her mind active.
All of it can be very overwhelming.
My daughter was born premature at six months.
The areas of the brain that allow her to walk and to speak well,
the motor areas were damaged.
When my wife passed away, it was even harder for me.
Not a lot of people know all the work that's involved.
It takes me around two to three hours for us to get ready for the meetings or the ministry.
Looking after someone 24-7 is extremely exhausting for the caregiver.
On some days I go to bed and even though I'm exhausted, I can't fall asleep.
So it can be very easy for frustration to build up.
And then you just snap.
Then you judge yourself really harshly for it after.
And you think, I'm awful. I'm an awful person.
I've learned that being a caregiver also means taking care of yourself first.
Because you need to be in a good place, both spiritually and physically.
I try to go for walks so that I can have a little bit more strength.
To take care of my relationship with Jehovah, my personal study is very important.
I usually do it at night when everything's calm in the house
and it's not necessary for me to be by her side.
As caregivers, we need to take care of our health.
So what I try to do is have a specific bedtime
and put aside my electronic devices at a certain time.
It's the simple things that sometimes you forget to do.
And as a caregiver, you tend to put yourself last.
So when I'm tired out, I ask my sister to help me take care of my mom.
And then I try to do something to enjoy myself.
If I'm able to take care of my mom's needs by myself with what I've got, then that's what I do.
But if my close family can't provide the additional help that we need,
it's really important for me as the caregiver to be able to say I'm tired.
I need help.
I used to feel too embarrassed to ask for help.
But then I realized that was actually preventing blessings that Jehovah wanted to give us.
For example, the other day we were writing letters
and I could see the love that the brothers and sisters have for my daughter.
When we go out in service, sometimes they say,
take a break, Damien. We'll take her today.
I feel comforted when the brothers and sisters are so interested in us.
Recently, as sister came by the house, I invited her to come in and she said,
no, I'm just stopping by.
I was thinking of you both and I wanted to bring you this.
It was a bag with some bread.
You'd think, it's just bread.
No. It's not just bread.
It's a sister's time, her money.
But mostly, it's her interest, her love.
For me, the benefit of having a close friend is being able to say to them,
hey, this is how I feel.
I want to cry. I want to run.
Sometimes my thoughts can overwhelm me.
Second Corinthians 1, 3 and 4 says,
praise be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
The Father of tender mercies and the God of all comfort.
Who comforts us in all our trials so that we may be able to comfort others
in any sort of trial, with the comfort that we receive from God.
Jehovah comforts me whether it's through the Scriptures or through the congregation.
And I can then offer that comfort to my daughter.
If my wife were here, we'd share this burden together.
But now I realize that I do share the burden with Jehovah.
This is how Jehovah has helped me to find balance and to be able to take care of us both.
Time and time again when we face difficult situations.
The only one who really knows what's in my heart is Jehovah.
And every single time without fail, he provides a solution.
Like Damian and Carolina, rest assured that Jehovah will comfort you too
in whatever trial you may face.
But what if our hardships result from our own actions?
In this episode of dig for treasures, note Jehovah's patience and appeal
to the sinful people of Joel's day.
The book of Joel contains only 73 verses, but the book reveals so much about Jehovah, doesn't it?
Absolutely. So let's dig in.
What would you like to start?
Well, we don't know much about Jehovah as a person since he recorded very little about himself.
So this is a great opportunity to dig into the historical context.
Great idea. Where did you find it?
Well, I found the history recorded in Second Kings very interesting.
In chapter 15, verse 4, it says that under King Aziraya, the high places were not removed
and the people were still sacrificing and making sacrificial smoke on the high places.
So Judah had a good king, but the nation was still steeped in false worship.
It seems that Joel prophesied during that time. I wonder what that was like.
I thought about the high places too. The inside book, under the heading high places,
says that they could be found not only on hills and mountains, but also in the valleys,
in stream beds and cities, and under the trees, and that frequently those high places were
scenes of disgusting sexual practices, including ceremonial prostitution and child sacrifice.
No wonder Jehovah hated false worship.
It must have pained him so much to watch his own people deliberately engage in a decade after decade.
I wonder how Joel felt seeing this taking place all around him.
How many people did he personally know who were affected by this false worship?
Maybe he wondered where the nation was headed and how long Jehovah was going to put up with it.
Well, he didn't have to wonder indefinitely.
Jehovah takes action, and he gives Joel this vivid prophecy about the awe-inspiring day of Jehovah.
Imagine what that must have been like.
The locust swarms that invade and strip the beautiful land of Judah bear,
the clouds and thick gloom, the sun and moon turning dark, and then complete restoration.
Wow.
That must have been so moving for Joel.
Jehovah gave Joel an outstanding glimpse of the discipline and the restoration that was in store for Israel.
This must have been so reassuring to Joel, and it must have greatly affected the way he delivered that message.
Think about this.
It's possible that Joel was the very first prophet that Jehovah told about that great day.
That brings up another great way to find treasure.
Look for Jehovah's actions, and when he took the action, Jehovah's actions reveal his character.
Oh, that's a great point.
So, Jehovah gives Joel this incredible message.
But when?
Look at the timing.
About 820 BCE.
More than 200 years before Jerusalem was destroyed.
So, think about that.
Jehovah warms his people of what is coming, and then gives them plenty of time to repent and to respond.
Jehovah's so patient.
Even with people who should know better, even with people who deliberately hurt him and hurt others.
So, we can say that even when provoked, Jehovah is patient.
Yes.
And let's keep going with that thought.
It also says something about Jehovah's sovereignty.
He's all powerful, but he doesn't force anyone to make changes.
Even his own people.
Jehovah's not a tyrant.
He appeals.
He doesn't force.
And we can go further.
Jehovah is impartial in exercising patience.
He wanted the nation of Israel to respond to the warning, but it wasn't just the nation as a whole.
Speaking of a later time, at Joel 232, Jehovah says,
and everyone who calls on the name of Jehovah will be saved.
He's appealing to all humans to repent and trust Jehovah's forgiveness.
Not as a collective, but as individuals, every one who calls.
That is a great point.
Let me make a note of that.
Everyone who means individuals.
What a beautiful treasure about Jehovah and his sovereignty.
So now, the next step.
Make personal application.
How does this all affect us?
This makes me think, how real is Jehovah's day to me?
Is it as vivid as it was to Joel?
Does my share in the ministry reflect that same sense of urgency?
And when I preach, am I impartial like Jehovah?
Or do I perhaps avoid preaching to certain cultures or classes of people?
Yeah, at Romans 10, 13, 14, Paul quoted Joel 232 and asked,
how will they hear without someone to preach?
We allow Jehovah to appeal to all individuals when we preach impartially.
And speaking of impartiality, what if someone in the congregation
has an irritating personality trait?
It may be easy to be patient with our close friends,
but what about brothers and sisters who get on our last nerve?
Yeah, it's easy to be selective with our patients.
But even if we're being provoked, what would it say about me?
If Jehovah's being patient with our brother and sister?
Yet I'm not.
Or what if we have oversight on the congregation?
When I give direction or need a council,
do I force or do I appeal?
Jehovah isn't a tyrant.
Am I imitating the way Jehovah treats people?
Wow, look at what just a few steps can lead to.
Researching the historical context,
looking for what actions Jehovah takes and when,
and making personal application.
And there's still so much more.
Like for instance, what do the locusts and Joel's prophecy represent?
Why did Jehovah want Israel to rip apart their hearts?
What can we learn about humility from Joel?
We haven't even scratched the surface yet.
So let's keep going, you know?
Something else I was thinking.
From Joel's day to hours,
Jehovah comforts us through hope.
But what exactly is hope?
And how can strong hope bring us daily comfort?
Brother Jeffrey Winder, a member of the governing body,
answers these questions in the following morning worship.
This means everlasting life.
That is the Christian hope, isn't it?
Jehovah promises that if we remain faithful,
he will grant us everlasting life either in heaven or on earth.
And that hope sustains us, doesn't it?
It is like an anchor that stabilizes us as we weather the storm
of this old system of things until our hope is realized.
But we also need what we might call short-term hope.
Now what is that?
We need hope that Jehovah will help us get through the day sometimes,
or to help us so that our current challenge, our current trial,
doesn't swallow us up.
We need that because life can be discouraging at times,
and hope fights discouragement.
So really, we need both aspects of hope, don't we?
So let's talk about hope this morning,
because when we understand clearly what hope is,
then we'll know what to do to keep it strong
and how it can help us when we feel discouraged.
So first of all, what is hope?
Women in the world view hope simply as naivety or unrealistic optimism.
One writer put it this way,
most people seem to think that hope is just a dopey form of denying the truth.
But true hope is not like that, is it?
True hope has a solid basis,
and is very closely related to faith.
So as we define hope,
it's important for us to understand this close relationship between hope and faith
so that we can understand it clearly.
Because on the one hand, the Bible says that faith is the basis for hope.
But it also says that hope is the basis for our faith.
So how are we to reconcile these things?
First of all, how is faith the basis for our hope?
Turn with me, please, to the book of Hebrews, chapter 11.
And notice just the first part of Hebrews 11-1.
How is faith the basis for our hope?
Hebrews 11-1 says faith is the assured expectation of what is hoped for.
So do we see the connection? Faith provides the basis, the foundation, the guarantee for our hope.
Faith is what distinguishes true hope from that naive, unrealistic optimism we mentioned earlier.
Now the awake illustrated it this way.
It said, when you ask a dear friend for a favor,
you may hope that he will help you out.
Your hope is not without basis because you have faith in your friend.
You know him well, and you have seen him act with kindness and generosity in the past.
Your faith and hope are closely related, even interdependent, but they are distinct.
So how does it work for us?
Well, we have faith in Jehovah God, that he cannot lie, that everything he has ever said in the past has come true down to the letter.
And so we have sure hope in his promise of everlasting life and in his promise to help us endure today.
There is certainty. Faith strengthens our hope.
But it works the other way as well, and the Bible indicates that hope is the basis for our faith.
Now how do we understand this?
Well, it turned pleased to Romans chapter 4, and notice what verse 18 says about Abraham's example.
Romans 4, 18, this is speaking about Jehovah's promise to Abraham that he would have an heir.
So Romans 4, 18, notice it says, although beyond hope, yet based on hope, he had faith,
that he would become the father of many nations according to what had been said,
so your offspring will be.
Based on hope, he had faith.
Now what does this mean really?
Well, the watchtower explained it this way.
It said hope is not just incidental to faith, it is an essential element of faith.
Consider Abraham. From a human standpoint, he and his wife Sarah were past childbearing age when Jehovah promised them an heir.
How did Abraham respond?
Well, then it quotes Romans 4, 18, based on hope he had faith.
And the watchtower said, yes, Abraham's God-given hope gave his faith that he would have an offspring a firm foundation.
So Abraham believed in Jehovah God's promise. He had hope in it.
And so that laid a foundation for him to exercise faith until that hope was realized.
While making application to us, another watchtower said,
if we truly believe the Christian hope, our whole life course will be a demonstration of our faith as was the case with Abraham.
So our hope gives us something to put faith in.
Our hope is that Jehovah will reward us in the future and will help us with our trials today.
And Jehovah has given us those promises. We trust in them. We hope in them.
And so then we can act in faith looking forward to their fulfillment.
So hope and faith are closely related, interdependent, one strengthens the other.
Faith makes our hope stronger because it gives us the basis, the foundation for our faith.
Hope also feeds our faith because if we truly believe in Jehovah's promises, then we have something to put faith in.
And our whole life will be a demonstration of our faith.
But now how can this help us? How can we make application of this?
Well, understanding what hope is helps us to know how to cultivate it and how it can help us to fight discouragement.
And our Christian hope certainly does that, doesn't it? This means everlasting life.
We have faith in Jehovah and we hope that this promise will be a reality and that helps us to endure.
But then we also have a promise like the one that we love so much in Isaiah chapter 41 in verse 10.
Isaiah 41, 10, where Jehovah says to us,
Do not be afraid for I am with you. Do not be anxious for I am your God. I will fortify you.
Yes, I will help you. I will really hold on to you with my right hand of righteousness.
Well, a verse like this, a promise like this helps us with what we called short term hope.
That is that Jehovah will help us get through the day that our current trials will not swallow us up.
It helps us to not be so discouraged by our trials.
Well, both aspects of hope really need to remain bright, don't they?
So how do we do that? How do we keep our hope strong?
Well, what did we learn?
Faith and hope work together, don't they? And so first of all, we take steps to strengthen our faith.
Because we do those foundation works that build our faith.
We read God's Word and meditate on it. We do personal study, prayer, meetings in the ministry.
Because when our faith is strong, when Jehovah is real to us, then we will have that solid basis to believe that Jehovah will live up to his promise to help us.
But also we learn that hope is the basis for our faith.
So knowing that we take deliberate steps to keep our hope bright.
And how do we do that?
Turn please to Romans chapter 15.
And notice what verse 4 says.
Romans 15 4.
For all the things that were written beforehand were written for our instruction.
So that, skip to the end, we might have hope.
Yes, God's Word gives us hope.
And so we study God's Word with a specific goal of brightening our hope.
We read God's promises. We visualize them. We make them real.
We pray to Jehovah and look to him for his personal help.
And when our hope is strong, that Jehovah will help us, that he will act in our behalf, then we will act in faith until that hope is realized.
And so on those days where maybe we get a bit discouraged and are feeling down, maybe overwhelmed or even a bit trapped,
think about the promises that Jehovah has made.
This means everlasting life.
Also that Jehovah will help you today.
These are the promises that we have that have a sure foundation.
We can have faith in them. We can put our hope in them.
And through faith and hope, let Jehovah pull you up, brighten your outlook, and endure with joy.
As Isaiah 38 says, happy are all those keeping an expectation of him.
It's our sincere desire that you take brother-wenders' words to heart and find immense comfort in your precious hope.
In this month's program, we've learned how comfort benefits others, how to give comfort, and how to receive it.
This month's music video highlights another way to offer comfort by expressing appreciation for others.
It's called, tell them you love them.
A beautiful road into growth, ones right there, need to know that you can have once again.
And I'll ask what we feel.
When we tell our brothers and sisters how much we love them, it truly bonds us as a spiritual family.
Our postcard this month takes us to the Republic of Ghana.
Ghana is a West African country nestled on the coast of the Gulf of Guinea.
Its diverse terrain includes dense forest and miles of scenic coastline.
A significant waterway in Ghana is the 1,000 mile long Volta River.
A dam was built in 1965 to create Lake Volta, which to this day is still one of the largest artificial reservoirs in the world.
Providing hydroelectric power across the region.
Ghana is also known for its cacao.
A key ingredient in chocolate, cacao is a major contributor to the country's export revenue.
The fertile land that supports cacao cultivation also sustains the country's rich culinary traditions.
Popular dishes include fish, Kelly Welley, which are fried plantains seasoned with spices, and Jalof, a dish of rice mixed with tomatoes, onions, peppers, and spices.
In 1924, Claude Brown joined William R. Brown, also known as Bible Brown, to bring spiritual food to West Africa, including Ghana.
One person who benefited from their visit was Eddie Ado.
Brother Ado attended Claude Brown's first lecture and was among the first group of brothers baptized.
Then in 1947, Sydney Wilkinson and George Baker from the eighth class of Gilead were assigned as missionaries to the Gold Coast, as Ghana was then known.
As the work expanded over decades, the need for a larger branch office became evident.
In 1988, a new branch office facility was completed and dedicated to Jehovah.
Today, the name Jehovah is so widely known in Ghana that it's often seen on buildings, public transportation, and boats.
Given the over 150,000 publishers, a unique starting point when witnessing.
In a recent service year, about 318,000 Bible studies were conducted, an average of two Bible studies per publisher.
Among the 2,585 congregations in Ghana is the Mandela Street Sign Language Congregation.
12 of the 31 publishers are pioneers who zealously cover a vast territory that overlaps with 100 other congregation territories.
The friends in the Mandela Street Sign Language Congregation send their warm love to you.
From the World Headquarters of Jehovah's Witnesses, this is J.W. Broadcasting.